---
layout: notebook
title: "S4 System"
description: ""
category: memo
tags: [S4]
---

S4, which stands for the 4<sup>th</sup> generation of S, is a formal Object
Oriented system for R language. The old system, S3, has a lot of shortcomings
such as it only allows method dispatch based on the first argument and new
classes can be created solely be given a class name. In S4, new classes need to
be created explicitly by function `setClass()`, with specified structure and
inheritance. Generic functions and methods dispatch also need to be defined
explicitly through functions `setGeneric()` and `setMethod()`. Furthermore,
method dispatch based on multiple arguments is supported. 

   {% highlight r %}
   ## definitions
   setClass("a_class", representation(...), prototype(), contains=FatherClass...)           
   setGeneric(f="a_func", def=function(var1, var2, ...) standardGeneric("mi"))                 
   args(a_func) # number of arguments for a Generic function                                             
   setMethod("mi", signature(var1= , var2= ,...), def=function(...) ...) # method dispatch
   {% endhighlight %}

To access elements of a S4 object, which are called _slots_, `@` instead of `$`
should be used. 

    {% highlight r %}      
    slotNames("a_class") # To see slots names
    getSlots("a_class") 
    getClass("a_class") # get the definition of a class
    {% endhighlight %}


Often, we would like to know what methods have been defined for a certain generic
function or a certain class. Contrast this with the corresponding functions in
the S3 system.

    {% highlight r %}
    ## S4 
    showMethods(f="a_func") # all possible methods for Generic mi
    showMethods(classes="a_class") # all possible methods whose signaure contains a_class
    getMethods(f="a_func", signature(...))

    ## similar functions in S3
    methods(summary)
    methods(class="lm")
    getS3method("summary", "lm")
    {% endhighlight %}
    
To enable working with legacy code, there are functions which promote S3 classes
and methods into S4 ones.
    
    {% highlight r %}
    ## VIRTUAL classes, Registered old-style S3 classes, an example from MI
    setOldClass("data.frame")
    setClass("missing_data.frame",  representation(...), contains = "data.frame")
    {% endhighlight  %}

This
[tutorial](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/contrib/Genolini-S4tutorialV0-5en.pdf)
is a pretty comprehensive introduction to S4 system.
