---
layout: notebook
title: "What is XeTeX?"
description: ""
category:
tags: [Typesetting]
---

<!--Some ideas: kpsexpand, add-hook, lambda(), differences between emacs variables commands function, \newcommadn, \renewcommand-->

Technical writers use LaTeX all the time, but few of us really have a more than
skin-deep understanding of its mechanism. We are already out of our comfort zone
when we talk about font encoding of LaTeX, then what is this palindromic beast
called `XeTeX`. Well, in short, what XeTeX enables you to do are: 1. XeTeX can
directly use system fonts other than the fonts that are packaged specifically for
TeX; 2. XeTeX assume Unicode (UTF-8 encoding) input by default, so it might be
helpful to process non-Latin text.

*System Fonts*

Originally, TeX tries to use its native font system MetaFont with its
default serif font family Computer Modern. Also, it uses default font encoding
called OT1. OT1 encoding has a lot of shortcomings, such as inadequate support
for non-ASCII characters, e.g., hyphenations and copy-paste might fail. Thus a
more comprehensive font encoding T1 was introduced, which supports most of the
European languages. To use T1 encoding, add the following to the LaTeX  preamble

    {% highlight tex %}
    \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
    \usepackage{lmodern}            
    {% endhighlight %}

However, you are still restricted to the fonts that are shipped with your TeX
distribution, e.g., TeX Live. If you would like to use your beautiful Minion Pro
font on your OS X, which are typically specified in font systems other than
MetaFont such as TrueType or OpenType, you cannot do this conveniently with
LaTeX. That is when XeTeX comes to rescue. The crucial step is to add `fontspec`
package to the preamble

     {% highlight tex %}
     \documentclass{article}
     \usepackage{fontspec}
     \setmainfont{Minion Pro}
     {% endhighlight %}

What is more, to make the document supports both Latex and XeTeX, we
can use `ifxetex` package.

    {% highlight tex %}
    \documentclass{article}
    \usepackage{ifxetex}
    \ifxetex
     \usepackage{fontspec}
     \usepackage{xunicode}
     \defaultfontfeatures{Mapping=tex-text} % To support LaTeX quoting style
     \setromanfont{Minion Pro               }
    \else
     \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
     \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
    \fi
    {% endhighlight %}  

*Unicode Input*

Using [Unicode](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode) as input encoding means you
can use input any human languages or signs directly in to a TeX file. For
example, To mix CJK input with English input, we need to load a package
   
    {% highlight tex %}
    \usepackage[BoldFont，CJKnumbb]{xeCJK}
    \setCJKmainfont{WenQuanYi Micro Hei}
    {% endhighlight %}

Then we can just type in any CJK characters. How cool is that! It is worth
mentioning that the author of XeTeX, Jonathan Kew, is a linguist/developer who
works for SIL International, a Christian organization which studies and documents
indigenous languages around the world. So besides translating the Bible into the
indigenous languages, they also help local people to write scientific papers!
There is an interesting [interview](https://tug.org/interviews/kew.html) of
Jonathan Kew on tug.org.
